# Transcription Course Instructions

This course is designed to help you learn how to transcribe passages of music onto your instrument.
It is similar to the improvisation course, but instead of providing the music sheet for the passage,
a passage in a recorded piece of music is provided. The aim of the exercises is not to notate the
music but to learn how to extract the musical elements of the passage into your preferred
instruments and ingrain them in your playing by using them as a basis for improvisation.

## How to use the course

The questions in the course refer you to the passage that you must transcribe. Due to copyright
laws, an audio file of the passage is not provided. Instead, you are given the passage as the
information about the track (artist, album, and track number) and the start and end timestamps of
the passage. There is the option to give an optional external link, which could contain a link to
the YouTube video of the track, for example.

You then get a copy of the track through your own means, find the passage in the track and proceed
according to the stage you are in. The stages are described below.

## Stages

The course is divided in several stages, each of which will help you become familiar with a
different aspect of the material.

### Singing

This is the first stage of the course. In this stage, you must listen to each passage repeatedly
until you can audiate it clearly in your mind. Then, you must sing the passage. For complex
passages, it is ok to focus on a single piece of the passage at a time. For example, you might sing
the drum part one time, the bass line another time, and so on.

You are not required to use solf√®ge syllables or numbers nor to notate the passage, although you are
free to do so if you wish.

### Transcription

This stage is meant to get you to extract the passage or some part of it onto your preferred
instruments and use that as a basis for improvisation. This step is not about accurately reproducing
the passage nor notating it, but about learning to extract its musical elements onto your instrument
and ingrain them in your playing. For example, you might become interested in playing with the
drumming in one session and with the harmonies played by a piano in another.

The stage depends on sufficiently mastering the singing stage.

### Advanced Singing

This stage is the same as the singing stage, but you have to transpose the passage up or down by a
random number of semitones each time you do the exercise.

The stage depends on sufficiently mastering the singing stage.

### Advanced Transcription

This stage is the same as the transcription stage, but you have to transpose the passage up or down
by a random number of semitones each time you do the exercise.

The stage depends on sufficiently mastering the advanced singing stage.

## Tools

### Transcribe!

The recommended tool for these exercises is
[Transcribe!](https://www.seventhstring.com/xscribe/overview.html). This is proprietary and paid
software, but is the best option for helping you transcribe the passages in these courses. It can
slow down, loop, and transpose the audio. It also has built-in tools to help you find which notes
and chords are being played.

There exists similar software, although not as feature-rich as Transcribe. At the very least, you
should be able to easily loop, slow down, and transpose the audio.
