# Improvisation Course Instructions

This course is designed to help you learn how to improvise based on the musical passages that you
provide. The aim of the exercises is not to play the passage as accurately as possible, but to learn
how to improvise using the musical elements of the passage as a starting point. The passages should
be musical and ideally come from real pieces of music.

At each stage of the process, you first learn how to improvise using your voice, and then you learn
how to do it for each of the instruments that you have selected in your user preferences. Changing
your user preferences will update the lessons the next time you open Trane.

If the exercise involves improvising on the melody or harmony of a passage, there will be separate
lessons for each key, starting with the key of C (the key with no flats or sharps). Mastering the
lesson for a key allows you to advance to the lesson for the key with one more flat or sharp.

If the passage is not in the major mode, you should still use the same key signature, although the
meaning is different. For example, the key of C Major becomes the key of A Minor, D Dorian, and so
on.

## Sight-singing

The rhythm, melody, and harmony lessons involving singing should be done with the aid of a solfège
system to help you associate each note with their feeling. You can choose any solfège system that
you are comfortable with. Below there are a few examples.

### Rhythmic sight-singing

Sight-singing for the rhythm lessons is not as important as for the melody and harmony lessons. You
can use a simple system. For example, a quarter note is a "ta", a half note is a "ta-a", and quick
notes are sung "ta-ka-ta-ka", etc. You are free to use an established system such as the Kodaly
system. Accuracy and being able to clearly sing the syllables are more important than rigidly
sticking to a system.

### Melodic sight-singing

Each of the following systems can be replaced with an equivalent system using numbers instead of
solfège syllables. "Do" becomes 1, "Re" becomes 2, and so on. They are not mentioned separately for
the sake brevity.

#### Movable Do-La solfège (Recommended)

The syllable "Do" is placed in the note of the key and stays there even for modes other than major.
For minor and other modes, the placing of the syllables is not modified. Instead, when sight-singing
a melody in a minor key, for example, the root of the scale is sung a "La", the second degree as
"Ti", the third degree as "Do", and so on.

This method has the advantage that all the modes can be sung using the same seven basic syllables.
When sight-singing in a different mode, it's only our perception of the root that changes, not the
syllables.

#### Movable Do

This system is the same as the previous one, except that the syllable "Do" changes its place for
different modes. For example, in the minor mode the root is sung as "Do", the second degree as "Re",
the third degree as "Me", and so on.

This system has the advantage that "Do" always represents the first degree of the scale or mode, but
it requires more syllables to be learned and the fact that all seven modes are made up of the same
notes is not so readily apparent.

#### Do moves to the root of the chord

This system is used by the Melodear app (more on that on the section on tools). In this system, the
"Do" syllable moves to the first note of the chord and changes each time there is a chord change.

This system has the advantage that the root of the chord is made more apparent, but it might not be
the best choice for music that stays within the same key for a long time, as it obscures the
relationships of the chords to the key of the music. For modal music which switches between
different modes and stays there for a longer time, this system might be a better fit.

See more discussion on the differences between the systems in this video:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=x0vmjkX9cOk.

## Stages

The course is divided in several stages, each of which will help you become familiar with a
different aspect of the material.

### Singing

This is the first stage of the course. In this stage, you must listen to each passage repeatedly
until you can imagine it clearly in your mind. Then, you must sing the passage. At this stage, it's
not required to use solfège syllables or numbers. There are no separate lessons for each key.
Instead, you should select a random key each time you do the exercise.

### Rhythm

This stage is accessible after you have passed the singing stage. In this stage, you must improvise
using the rhythm of the passage. You must first do it singing and then with each of the instruments
you have selected.

### Melody

This stage is accessible after you have passed the singing stage. In this stage, you must improvise
using the melodic elements of the passage. You must first do it singing and then with each of the
instruments you have selected. This stage contains separate lessons for each key.

### Basic Harmony

This stage is accessible after you have passed the singing stage. In this stage, you must improvise
using the harmonic elements of the passage. The basic harmony consists of the chord tones of each of
the chords in the progression. You must first do it singing and then with each of the instruments
you have selected. This stage contains separate lessons for each key.

### Advanced Harmony

This stage is accessible after you have passed the basic harmony stage. In this stage, you must
improvise using all the harmonic elements of the passage, including chromatic notes. You must first
do it singing and then with each of the instruments you have selected. This stage contains separate
lessons for each key.

### Mastery

This stage is accessible after you have passed the rhythm, melody, and advanced harmony stages. In
this stage you take everything that you have learned and apply it to your improvisation. You must
first do it singing and then with each of the instruments you have selected. There are no separate
lessons for each key. Instead, you should select a random key each time you do the exercise.

## Tools

### Lilypond

Passages in the official improvisation courses are written using the plain-text Lilypond format. See
the [Lilypond](./lilypond.md) section for more information.

### SoundSlice

The passages in this course can also be declared as links to a SoundSlice page. SoundSlice is a
great tool that lets you play, loop, and transpose a musical score. It's not used in the course
since it is a proprietary tool and requires online access, but it is a great tool, and you are free
to use it in your own courses. There is no native integration with SoundSlice, but you can easily
add a Markdown file with the link to the SoundSlice as its content.

### Melodear

The Melodear app is a great tool for sight-singing. It provides a grid of the tones of the selected
chord and mode and gives you great visual feedback of where you are singing. The free version only
lets you use a few chords, but it should be enough since you only need one chord if you are
sight-singing with the recommended Do-La solfège system.

See this [page](https://melodear-app.com/melodear-training) for additional training on how to use
Melodear.
